docs/agents: add sampling spec (#307)
elastic/apm: docs/agents/sampling.md

non-sampled transactions have limited context and no spans.

For non-sampled transactions set the transaction attributes `sampled: false` and `sample_rate: 0`, and omit `context`.
No spans should be captured.

In the future we may introduce options to agents to stop sending non-sampled transactions altogether.

## Propagation

As mentioned above, the sampling decision must be propagated throughout the trace.
We adhere to the W3C Trace-Context spec for this, propagating the decision through trace-flags: https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#sampled-flag

In addition to propagating the sampling decision (boolean), agents must also propagate the sampling rate to ensure it is consistently attached to to all events in the trace.
This is achieved by adding an `s` attribute to our [`elastic` `tracestate` key](distributed-tracing.md#tracestate) with the value of the sampling rate.
e.g.

    tracestate: elastic=s:0.1,othervendor=<opaque>

As `tracestate` has modest size limits we must keep the size down.
When recording `s` in `tracestate` the sampling rate should be rounded half away from zero to 3 decimal places.
e.g.

    0.5554 -> 0.555
    0.5555 -> 0.556

>     0.5556 -> 0.556

Reviewer: Maybe add a suggestion for the implementation like

```java
(double) Math.round(sampleRate * 1000d) / 1000d
```

Author: Done, but in Go :sunglasses:

For a downstream agent, if `tracestate` is not found or does not contain an `elastic` entry with an `s` attribute,

> then it must assume a sampling rate of 1 just as the server does for backwards compatibility.

Reviewer: Should the agent set the `s` attribute and `transaction.sample_rate` then? Or cant it leave that up to APM Server?

Author: You mean if it's missing just don't set the field? That sounds sensible to me - will update.

Reviewer: This may have a wide-ranging implication: Agents wouldn't need to parse the `tracestate` header at all. They could just count the occurrences of `=` in the header to determine whether the limit of 32 entries has been reached. If not, they can prepend `elastic=s:${sampleRate},` to the opaque existing header value.
It means that we wouldn't apply validations for the headers we receive but do we have to?

Author: In this specific case we only care about setting the `tracestate` entry at the root anyway (where the sampling decision is made), which means we're initialising `tracestate` from empty. So we don't need to worry about the 32 entry limit yet.

Reviewer: Ah, right. This makes the implementation way easier and also more efficient then as we don't have to actually parse the header.
I wonder if we should remove the section about validation rules then or at least indicate that currently, they don't play a role.

Author: > I wonder if we should remove the section about validation rules then or at least indicate that currently, they don't play a role.

I've added a note, let me know what you think.

# Sampling

To reduce processing and storage overhead, transactions may be sampled by agents.
Sampling here refers to "head-based sampling".
Head-based sampling is where a sampling decision is made at the root of the distributed trace, before the details or outcome of the trace are known, and propagated throughout the trace.

## Configuration

Agents can be configured to sample probabilistically, by specifying a sampling probability in the range \[0,1\] using the configuration `ELASTIC_APM_TRANSACTION_SAMPLE_RATE`. e.g.

 - `ELASTIC_APM_TRANSACTION_SAMPLE_RATE=1` means all transactions will be sampled (the default)
 - `ELASTIC_APM_TRANSACTION_SAMPLE_RATE=0` means no transactions will be sampled
 - `ELASTIC_APM_TRANSACTION_SAMPLE_RATE=0.5` means approximately 50% of transactions will be sampled

## Sampling rate

At the time of making a sampling decision, the sampling rate must be recorded so that it can be associated with every transaction and span in the trace.

> This will be used by the server for scaling transaction and span metrics.
> 
> The sampling rate must be recorded on transactions and spans as `sample_rate`. e.g.

Reviewer: I think this could help to connect the dots on why this is important and how it is used:

```suggestion
This will be used by the server for scaling transaction and span metrics.
These metrics are used in the service map to display performance and throughput both from the perspective of the service itself (transaction metrics grouped by `service.name`) and from the perspective of upstream services (exit span metrics grouped by `destination.service.resource`).

These metrics will be more accurate when the sampling rate is high.
But even with lower sampling rates,
the server is able to calculate representative metrics.
To enable the server to properly weigh the metrics, agents must record the sampling rate on transactions and spans as `sample_rate`. e.g.
```

Author: SGTM, thanks!

    {"transaction":{"name":"GET /","sample_rate":0.1,...}}
    {"span":{"name":"SELECT FROM table","sample_rate":0.1,...}}

For non-sampled transactions the `sample_rate` field _must_ be set to 0.
For backwards compatibility the server will assume a value of 1 where the field is unspecified,
resulting in all transactions (sampled and unsampled) being counted equally in metrics.

## Non-sampled transactions

Currently _all_ transactions are captured by Elastic APM agents.
Sampling controls how much data is captured for transactions: sampled transactions have complete context recorded, and include spans;
non-sampled transactions have limited context and no spans.

> For non-sampled transactions set the transaction attributes `sampled: false` and `sample_rate: 0`, and omit `context`.

Reviewer 2: if `sample` = `false` and `sample_rate` is missing, the server will default the rate to 1, all while sampling being false, which doesn't make much sense. This opens the possibility for bugs. Am I missing something? Is there a way to be more semantically coherent?

Reviewer: I'm not sure I get it. Why would `sample_rate` be missing? If `sampled: false` the `sample_rate` must be set to 0. It's just the transaction `context` that's being omitted. The `sample_rate` field is not part of `context`.

Reviewer 2: I mean that is an optional field, so technically can be missing. I guess the "If sampled: false the sample_rate must be set to 0 because." kind of logic can slip quite easily (particularly thinking about future agents)

Author: > If sampled: false the sample_rate must be set to 0

I think this bit is more confusing now that we're sending `sample_rate` and not `sample_weight`...

> if sample = false and sample_rate is missing, the server will default the rate to 1, all while sampling being false, which doesn't make much sense. This opens the possibility for bugs. Am I missing something? Is there a way to be more semantically coherent?

The reason to have the server default the rate to 1 is to preserve backwards compatibility when calculating transaction histogram metrics. At the moment the server effectively assumes a rate of 1 for all transactions (excluding Jaeger). That is, sampled and non-sampled transactions are each counted as 1 in the histogram updates.

When the server sees `sample_rate: 0` it should treat that value specially and ignore the transaction when updating duration histogram metrics.

It is a little bit subtle. I'm open to alternative suggestions.

Reviewer 2: Thanks @axw for explanations. 
What would be the implications of breaking backwards compatibility? 
Eg. what would happen if we default `sample_rate` to 0 when `sampled` is `false`, or 1 otherwise?

Author: If we defaulted to 0 for `sampled: false`, and 1 for `sampled: true`: for old agents that don't _ever_ send `sample_rate`, the transaction counts/rates would be under counted in histogram metrics. e.g.

Sampling rate is set to 0.5

Old agent:
- First transaction is sampled - transaction event sent with `sampled: true`
- Second transaction is unsampled - transaction event sent with `sampled: false`
- Server would count the first (default sample_rate=1), but not the second (default sample_rate=0) in histogram aggregation.

New agent:
- First transaction is sampled - transaction event sent with `sampled: true`, `sample_rate: 0.5`
- Second transaction is unsampled - transaction event sent with `sampled: false`, `sample_rate: 0`
- Server would count the first as 2 transactions (1/0.5), and would not count the second at all (sample_rate=0) in histogram aggregation.

Reviewer 2: Ok :+1:  Maybe document the case than when all transactions are unsampled, none will count.

Author: @jalvz I've been wondering about this. I'm not sure if we should handle it or not.

@felixbarny in a meeting yesterday, @jalvz asked how we should deal with a user specifying a sampling rate of 0. In that case (with the current spec) the agent sets `sample_rate: 0` on every transaction, and the server will never update histogram metrics. The Metrics-based UI would then differ from our current behaviour, aggregating all (sampled and unsampled) transaction docs.

We could address that by having _another_ special case: if the user-specified sampling rate is 0, then for non-sampled transactions set `sample_rate: 1`. That would treat all (100% unsampled) transactions equally for the purpose of updating histograms.

But, if we want to stop sending unsampled transaction events to the server completely (like Jaeger, OpenTelemetry, ...), we can't do anything similar. In that case we would have to capture histograms in the agents.

Any thoughts on how we should proceed?

Reviewer: I don't think we should special-case `0`. We have a similar issue when setting a really low sampling rate. The lower the rate, the less accurate the metrics will be. 

One special treatment we might want to consider, though, is to ensure that the minimum reported `sample_rate` is `0.001` if the `transaction_sampling_rate` is > 0. This avoids converting `0.0001` to `0`.

We're also not just calculating transaction metrics but also span metrics. We don't send any non-sampled spans. I assume the service map edge metrics will be based on the span metrics? Not sure about that. Might be a good addition to the spec. We should only have inconsistent ways of calculating metrics for transactions and spans if there's a very good reason. 

> But, if we want to stop sending unsampled transaction events to the server completely (like Jaeger, OpenTelemetry, ...), we can't do anything similar. In that case we would have to capture histograms in the agents.

Exactly, we shouldn't assume that we're sending up non-sampled transactions in the future. Every feature that relies on it avoids us from getting rid of that. If we want more accuracy for lower sampling rates, we have to track metrics on the agent and tell APM Server to omit metric tracking by setting a flag on the metadata.

Reviewer 2: > The lower the rate, the less accurate the metrics will be

I don't think this is exactly the case. If sampling rate is 0, then the histogram will be missing / totally off, not simply "less accurate". IIUC.

I agree that *another* special case is not ideal. I don't know how complicated would be in the server to detect the case where all transactions in a trace have sampling rate 0, and then act accordingly. Probably *very* fiddly. 

> we would have to capture histograms in the agents

Why not go directly down that route? Or have the agents send the minimal aggregated data needed to a separate endpoint in apm-server, and have the server then to assemble histograms. I expect that could be done with fairly low overhead.

Author: @felixbarny 

> One special treatment we might want to consider, though, is to ensure that the minimum reported sample_rate is 0.001 if the transaction_sampling_rate is > 0. This avoids converting 0.0001 to 0.

That sounds fine, but then I think we should also ensure the agents round the sampling rate in the first place. i.e. state in docs that the precision is say 0.001 (sample 1 in 1000), and any value smaller than that would be rounded. If it would round to 0, the agents/UI should emit a warning that nothing will be sampled, and there will be no trace data or transaction metrics collected.

> We're also not just calculating transaction metrics but also span metrics. We don't send any non-sampled spans. I assume the service map edge metrics will be based on the span metrics? Not sure about that. Might be a good addition to the spec. We should only have inconsistent ways of calculating metrics for transactions and spans if there's a very good reason.

Great point. Yes, edge metrics == span metrics. I'll update the spec to describe how the `sample_rate` will be used by the server, including both transaction histograms and span/edge metrics.

@jalvz 

> I don't think this is exactly the case. If sampling rate is 0, then the histogram will be missing / totally off, not simply "less accurate". IIUC.

That's the ultimate inaccuracy isn't it? :)

We're intentionally trading off metrics accuracy here: the statistics will be based off sampled data only. When the Metrics-based UI is introduced we should be clear about that. Instead of setting sampling rate to 0 and expecting accurate metrics, users will have to set it to 0.1, 0.01 or 0.001 (depending on transaction rate).

Later we can consider improving accuracy by measuring transaction metrics at the agent. In that case metrics would not be based on sampling, and sample size/rate would not impact the metrics.

> I agree that another special case is not ideal. I don't know how complicated would be in the server to detect the case where all transactions in a trace have sampling rate 0, and then act accordingly. Probably very fiddly.

It's not impossible, but it is impractical. Not all events in the trace will necessarily go to the same server.

>> we would have to capture histograms in the agents
>
> Why not go directly down that route? Or have the agents send the minimal aggregated data needed to a separate endpoint in apm-server, and have the server then to assemble histograms. I expect that could be done with fairly low overhead.

Not sure what you mean by the "Or" there. The agents either have to send histograms (minimal aggregated data), or they have to send individual events (what we're doing today) for the server to create histograms. We want to move away from what we're doing today because it is expensive.

Sending individual (unsampled and sampled) transactions is also prone to incidental inaccuracy at high transaction rates, as it requires all events to make their way through to the server to calculate valid statistics. Basing the statistics off sampled data will alleviate this problem by intentionally only measuring sampled data.

I think we might want to implement agent-side aggregation _eventually_, but it's considerably more work for agents to implement, and we still need to implement the aggregations in the server for Jaeger and OpenTelemetry anyway.

Author: I've attempted to clarify all of the above in the renamed section: "Effect on metrics". PTAL

@felixbarny I didn't update it to say we should round sampling rate to 0.001. As above I think we should do that earlier (in configuration), and not just when recording the value in `tracestate`. Otherwise the metrics will be inconsistent with reality.

Reviewer: Are you saying we should disallow sampling rates lower than 0.001?

Author: Opened https://github.com/elastic/apm/issues/322 to follow up on that

Reviewer 2: > Later we can consider improving accuracy by measuring transaction metrics at the agent.

Cool, that is what I tried to say (not based on sampling) :+1:

> To reduce processing and storage overhead, transactions may be sampled

Author: :iseewhatyoudidthere:

I think I'll find it awkward to write like that, but I'll give a it a shot - after https://github.com/axw/elastic-apm/pull/1 is merged in.

> To reduce processing and storage overhead, transactions may be sampled

Author: Done.

by agents. Sampling here refers to "head-based sampling", where a sampling
decision is made at the root of the distributed trace, before the details
or outcome of the trace are known, and propagated throughout the trace.

## Configuration

Agents can be configured to sample probabilistically, by specifying a
sampling probability in the range \[0,1\] using the configuration
`ELASTIC_APM_TRANSACTION_SAMPLE_RATE`. For example:

 - `ELASTIC_APM_TRANSACTION_SAMPLE_RATE=1` means all transactions will be sampled (the default)
 - `ELASTIC_APM_TRANSACTION_SAMPLE_RATE=0` means no transactions will be sampled
 - `ELASTIC_APM_TRANSACTION_SAMPLE_RATE=0.5` means approximately 50% of transactions will be sampled

## Sampling weight

At the time of making a sampling decision, a "sampling weight" must be calculated.
This value represents the approximate number of traces that the sampled trace is
representative of. Every transaction and span in the trace must have the same weight.

> For probabilistic sampling, the weight is the inverse of the sampling rate.

Author: > I wonder if it's easier to just use the sampling rate. If we want to do rate limiting later on, we can calculate the effective sampling rate by comparing the configured rate vs the actual rate.

Good point...

> Or is the reason to use weight based on the assumption that when using a weight, we would usually take up fewer characters in tracestate

I think this comment was meant for here? I just thought "weight" generalised better, but you make a compelling point. I'm happy to change it to sampling rate, and then we can just say to round to say... 3 decimal places? I think that's probably precise enough.

> For probabilistic sampling, the weight is the inverse of the sampling rate.

Author: I changed it to sample rate, let me know what you think.

I find the backwards compatibility case a little harder to understand this way, but that's probably OK.

> For probabilistic sampling, the weight is the inverse of the sampling rate.

Reviewer: I see how a default weight of 1 is a bit more intuitive than assuming a default sample rate of 100% but in the end it has the same effect.
